Tuesday, June the 19th, I believe, testing 1, 2, 3.
All right.
Can you grab a gurney?
This is June the 19th.
We're in the library, and I have the honor and pleasure of chatting with Joe Berg, one of the now-retired key members of the library staff.
To introduce yourself to the listener to this tape and or the reader of the transcription, give a biographical sketch of yourself before you got here as a professional.
Where did you grow up?
What did mom and dad do?
Where did you go to school?
I grew up in St. Paul, Minnesota, and I went to public schools there.
I had the wonderful opportunity of going to a small liberal arts college in Northfield, Minnesota by the name of Carleton, and that was one of the highlights of my life.
I, Bob and I had, my husband and I had met each other in high school,
and started to date but we seriously got together and he went into the army and he went into the pre-meteorology unit and his unit, pre-meteorology unit was stationed
at Carleton College taking all their math and physics and all of those things that have to be taken if you're going into a technical field.
And as things turned out, he was turned out after all of this heavy math and physics concentration, he turned out
that he was colorblind.
And then, of course, they were starting right then.
They realized that they might have had too many at a certain level.
So he went into the weather service.
And he, of course, has probably, in this venue, told you all that happened in the weather service.
And that's a whole lot.
But anyway, to make a long story short, we were married.
in 1946.
And we came out, we went out to Denver in 1951.
In fact,
This month, it'll be all 50 years since we were in Denver.
And we got, in those last few weeks, we went back to Denver when Bob had a meeting.
We got together with our sons and our grandson and celebrated this occasion at the Commander's Palace at the wonderful old hotel there that's so special.
Okay, well, that tells you.
Anyway, we had three boys, and when the youngest was in fifth grade, we were still in Denver, and I went to library school at the University of Denver, and that's where I got my library.
What was your undergraduate?
My undergraduate degree was sociology and psychology.
What did you think you were going to do?
What did I think I was going to do?
I really didn't know what I was going to do, but I'm glad that I became a librarian, a reference librarian.
What led you toward libraries?
Not, I think it was, I probably, as far as being subject oriented, I'm much more people oriented than I am subject oriented.
But still, you have to have a knowledge of the subject.
And of course, you still do.
I don't care.
Whatever, if you're dealing with the public, who or whichever your publics are, you'd better be interested.
in their problems and be a little considerate of them in that.
This was at the University of Colorado or University of Denver?
No, this is University of Denver that had a library school.
As a matter of fact, it was a short distance from our house, probably about eight blocks away.
Then after Denver where?
Then after Denver, I worked for the first few months after I graduated from the University of Denver in 1966,
I worked in the Denver Public Library in the children's division of the public library.
I enjoyed that very much.
And then Bob was offered the job to come here as head of the geology department, which had just, I think, I can't remember how this went, but geosciences became separate with geology, geography, geophysics, all as part of, it had been,
previously a part of the engineering department.
So this was a very, this was a great change for that whole part of the university to have this extra college added.
In today's world, he would have negotiated a position for his wife.
Was your desire for a job even mentioned in his
No, I'm sure not.
That's right, I'm sure not.
And the point was that they were so hard up for librarians, they would have taken anybody off the street at that point, I believe.
They were really very hard up for.
Describe your move from, was it Denver to here?
Denver, I thought I was not a crashing good sport.
I thought I was moving to the end of the world.
And little did I know, 50, you know, all these many years later, 35 years later, that we are staying here.
This is just amazing.
If anybody had told me then.
Same here.
If anybody had told me then that I would be living in Bryan College Station, Texas, I would have just, you know, probably run screaming out of the room.
Describe your first impressions when you first visited here.
It was pleasant because it was January.
And there were even some, I think there was something blooming.
I can't remember what it was, but something was blooming.
And I thought we'd just come out of a blizzard.
So I thought, my goodness, this is going to be very nice.
Little did I know what was coming.
But we rented the first year we were here.
And then we bought a house where we still live over on East Brookside in Bryan.
So you bought that house what year?
We bought that house in 1968.
And we have subsequently done a lot to it.
And we love it, love the old house.
And it just kind of fits old college professor types.
You know, cluttery bookish, that kind of thing.
So, all right, you arrived in January, and about how long was it before you started working?
I didn't start work until the next summer.
I started July 1st of 67.
How did you learn about a vacancy?
I think it was Dr. Dyke who was at the time the director of the library, and he,
I don't know where I heard about the job being open, but I did hear that there was a job open.
I also interviewed someone in Bryan.
It might have been Rebecca Landman at some point in time, but I knew that the university sounded infinitely better at that point than the public library scene.
But having said that, I am now on the board of the public library system.
College Station and Bryan for some time and have really enjoyed it and here again seeing such a change.
Describe the interview, the search process that led to your employment.
It practically, that practically wasn't when I was hired.
They were just so anxious
to get people in here to work.
They needed it so badly.
You talked to... Dr. Dyke and I talked to... What was his first name?
James Dyke.
Yeah, James Dyke.
I think it was James Dyke.
And then I talked, of course, to LaBelle Castle.
But I don't think I talked to her very long.
And she was, you know, in our generation would call her an old-timey librarian.
You know, she was a stickler for everything.
She knew where everything was at that point in time.
But you did what you were supposed to do, and that was fine.
And she wasn't going to question anything you did as long as you were going to do your job.
And describe the job you were offered.
The job I was offered was just a reference librarian because, of course, it was all general reference.
And that's what general reference meant was whatever reference material they could get on the second floor of Cushing is what that meant.
And you were probably there then, too, so you know what was there.
This is the only dollar question.
What was the beginning pay?
You know, I have no idea.
I can't.
I'm telling you the truth.
I don't remember that.
A lot of people would remember that first thing.
In fact, I was rereading Bob's memoirs the other day,
And he remembered what the California company offered him in Denver those many years ago.
But I don't remember, I don't remember.
Did they describe for you your responsibilities?
Not like it came to be, my goodness, no.
There was very little, you know, we just sort of did this, did that, just kept things going.
And what were your normal working hours?
My normal working hours were just about 8 to 5 and we all had to, up until the time I retired, all of us had to work a night and a weekend.
In addition to the day?
In addition, yeah, in addition to our day.
Usually on the day that we worked a night we would leave at noon or come in at noon depending on how you wanted to do it and work it that way.
I would always
work until noon and then and then take the afternoon off and and then go back from six to ten describe the make believe i didn't know anything about the texas a m library in the mid this is 67. this is this is going to be 67. describe the texas a m library in 1967. it was it was uh well considering
considering the isolation of what was A&M and considering the curriculum that was heavily weighted, of course, and you know this as well as I do, heavily weighted on the science, technology, and agriculture.
And very little went into the liberal arts.
Because of you and some of your colleagues, you got started with this, but it certainly wasn't going to be evident
And building, you know, I don't think that those early people realized, had any idea how much the university was going to grow, how much you had to build your library collections to support this.
I don't think anybody had any idea.
Maybe I didn't even realize how much it was going to have to change, things would have to change.
Now it was the Cushing Building
And they were just finishing the, they were just completing the Evans Library, the first edition, which is this building.
To include.
To build around the Gilchrist.
To build around, right, to build around that.
We were going to have, we were going to have divisional reference, the science and technology was going to be on the fourth floor,
We were down on the third floor.
Social sciences and liberal arts were on the third floor.
Documents was on the second floor, which was on the second floor.
That lasted a long time.
But eventually we consolidated, and we were always reorganizing.
I was talking to my compadres over here.
My goodness gracious, it never stops.
They're still in this, going through all of this change.
But of course, the biggest change has come probably in the last 10 years with all of the
That new addition, when did it, when was it finished?
The new, the Evans Library I think was finished maybe in the fall of 68.
I mean it was in the process when I moved here, when I took a job here in 67.
Do you remember any stories about the complications that the librarians endured while the construction was underway?
Not from any serious standpoint, because we didn't have to worry about too big a collection.
I mean, that engineering was already sort of established.
But I don't remember any real stories about inconvenience.
And of course, I might not have anyway.
But that was just one of those things.
Now, your responsibilities were broad.
Were broad, were very broad.
That included education, too.
You know, we had the College of Education.
We had all of their teacher textbooks.
We had all of their curriculum collections.
This included a lot of material.
And subsequently, we just did not have room for these materials.
And that was when the big push was to go to put everything as yet you possibly could on microfilm.
Well, we read in the New York Times about the dangers of that.
But you can't keep this much material.
You cannot keep it.
Logistically, there is not going to be room to keep the New York Times forever and ever.
Amen.
So this gentleman that has made a big splash in the press, he may have a little serious problem at some point in time when his heirs have to shovel him out, to be perfectly blunt.
Did anybody, when you began as a new member of the professional staff, did anybody give you any guidelines, any assignments, any rules?
Not really.
No, you were just expected to be a nice person and do your job and that was it.
And how did a professional lady in the library staff dress in those days?
Well, you didn't, it was just at the time when people were starting to wear pantsuits, but most of us just wore skirts.
And we didn't try to dress up, but we did wear skirts and sweater.
Well, actually, I don't think, I always had a sweater in this library because sometimes it would get very cold in the air conditioning.
And that never changed.
The, in those early years,
Where did you and your colleagues, if you wanted to have a refreshment, where did you?
Well, I think in those years, we had a staff.
There was a staff lounge.
I don't know if it's still here.
In the early days of Evans, there was a staff lounge around the
around that way, it seems to me, I'm thinking of it.
And so we could always go in the staff lounge, and they had, of course, with anything like that, students were frequently getting themselves in there, and so they had to put locks on it, and the locks would always not work, or somebody would pick them, you know, just the same old stuff.
Describe the senior leadership in the library then.
Who were they?
The senior, after LaVelle, let's see, after Dr. Dyke left, Jack Smith came.
And he was, Jack Smith, Describe him.
He was simply, he was wonderful.
I couldn't believe that anybody could be so caring about the staff.
You know, you didn't expect that.
And as we found out later, it wasn't going to last very long.
But anyway, he was a very caring person and everybody liked him.
Everybody really, really liked Jack.
We were all just crushed when he left here.
He went to Stony Brook.
And he went to Stony Brook and subsequently did get his Ph.D.
But from my
from hearsay or something that he didn't he did not get the permanent position here because he did not have his doctorate but I don't know that to be true this is just what I hearsay so that is not probably anything.
And then who was next?
Well our former director was Irene Hoadley.
Did she fall in Jack?
And she followed Jack.
Right.
We'll talk about her in a minute.
Who were, were there associate or assistant directors?
Yes.
Henry Alsmeyer was an assistant.
Describe him.
Henry Alsmeyer was a very, I would, he was well-meaning.
So I don't mean to be critical, but he was very stuffy.
And he had a tendency to treat us like we were parishioners instead of staff.
We always thought that we were in Bible school or something.
But that's not fair.
That isn't fair, because I realize
He was brought up in a very strict family.
He was, you know, he was his own person.
What was your first impression of Texas A&M students?
Well, of course, there were so many male students at that point.
I've always loved being on a college campus.
I really have.
I really enjoy that part of it.
That's what I really miss, as a matter of fact, being retired.
I miss seeing the students.
Now, I don't miss them on the highways particularly, but I do miss the atmosphere.
I always have enjoyed mingling with them.
But now, you as a newcomer to Texas, you didn't know about Aggies.
I didn't know about Texas Aggies.
What were your first impressions of Aggies?
My first impression of Texas Aggies?
Well, that they were a very disciplined group, and they always said, ma'am, and they were so polite.
I couldn't believe how polite these
Then even during the hippie days, you wouldn't see a hippie around here, that's for sure.
But anyway, they were unusually polite.
And some of them were plainly scared to ask for help.
They came off the farm.
They were scared kids.
And having had boys of my own, I could kind of sense when somebody was having a little problem
being able to articulate what they really wanted.
Describe some of, there must have been some amusing and sometimes very serious requests that a student made of a new reference librarian.
I don't even know if it were that sophisticated at that particular point.
I never had any question that I didn't feel that I couldn't answer or couldn't get one of the other librarians to answer.
But didn't they sometimes ask for something unusually simple?
Well, of course, we always made the joke when they would first come, they'd always want to know where the restrooms were, but that isn't exactly a difficult question to answer.
Anyway.
Now, in the olden days, under Tommy Mayo, before you got here, the library was the place of escape from core harassment.
Oh, I didn't realize that.
Did you see, you didn't see?
I didn't see any core harassment.
No, no, this is a place you could get away from.
Go get away from, okay.
Well, I suppose that's true.
But it really wasn't.
If the whole Corps was trying to get away from harassment, it would fill up the library pretty fast.
Did you sometimes see students asleep?
Yes.
Well, we did, and particularly during final week, we would see them asleep.
In fact, during my later years, they used to bring their bed rolls and their, yes, this is true, they used to bring their bed rolls and they had their, you know, water canteens and lunches and whatever else they brought, and they'd stay all night in the stacks.
And several times we found that some of them had managed to get into a faculty carrel and set up housekeeping.
And so this of course caused a little furor, but that was taken care of eventually.
And none of that was legal?
None of that was legal.
None of that was of course legal.
When you first began, the library closed at what time?
I think the library closed at 10 o'clock.
I'm not absolutely positive about that.
And then on Sundays?
It might have been open from 1 to 5.
And on Saturdays from, it would close at 6.
But I think it closed, on Saturdays I think the library pretty much up until,
the recent years has closed till six, it might have been open from nine to nine, it may be open now, so that people can study, but the reference desks were not staffed after six o'clock.
Where did you, in those early years, where did you and your colleagues have lunch?
Well, I remember having lunch in, I don't know where I had lunch over when we were still in the Cushing building.
I might have gone home for lunch.
But now, after that, I used to eat in the staff lounge or go out.
I actually rarely did go out during those days because we only had one hour and you were trying to keep your hours.
And when you first arrived, parking for a librarian was where?
Yes, was in where the addition is.
That's where we all parked in this lot.
Was it lot six?
Lot six.
Which is, of course, our library addition now.
And when I come up from the parking garage now and I see that, look around and see that, I think, my goodness, that's quite a facility.
The parking lot never seemed that big until I looked at this addition.
Now, had you worked in a university library before coming out?
No.
No, I had never.
You see, I was a new, as I said, I didn't start my library degree until my youngest child, our youngest son was in sixth grade, fifth grade.
And so, this meant that I had never had, I never had library experience before.
And then I was just very briefly, just a few months in the Denver Public Library as a children's librarian.
All right.
Did your department head husband,
offer any comments about the quality of the library here when he first got here, our holdings?
I don't, I think he had enough of what he, of what they needed.
I mean if I had been married to someone in the liberal arts or social sciences I would have heard a lot more I believe.
But he had, there was enough material
they had not only in the library but with different faculty had their own collections as we has as he has his own collection so this is this was not critical problem at that time but certainly it became so later and in terms of your recollections of those early years in terms of the staffing was the staff comparatively adequate in number of professionals
I don't think it was ever adequate with the number of professionals.
And while we're talking about staff, if there's nothing else that I get down here today, I want to stress how important the classified staff is.
Well, this is true for any department.
The support staff is so important to running anything.
People working now were working very shortly after I came and they're still working and you know we depend completely on those people.
We couldn't manage, we couldn't, it wouldn't go very far.
Who are the ones that you most remember?
The ones that I most remember of course would be Kathy Taylor and Kathy Taylor
of Dale Craxton.
Spell it, Bill Craxton.
Dale Craxton is in, she's in documents, I think.
Spell it.
Craxton, C-R-A-X-T-O-N, Dale Craxton.
And what made them such outstanding?
Well, because they got, and you know, how about someone like Bill Page?
All these people know the collections.
They know how to find what, when,
without making waves about it.
You know, they're really superb, superb staff members.
And there were many others that I could mention.
Another one I could mention in the technical services would have been Dorothy Kelly, who I understand now is over at the Bush Library cataloging for free.
Well, that's pretty neat.
If you're still going to do that in your retirement years, I think that's plenty nice.
But these people are really dedicated.
Of course, they have the same kind of hours as we all did, and they had their problems just like we all did, but they all managed to come through with flying colors.
My mind recalls a person from my acquaintance in the first years, and I wonder if she was still here when you got here, Mrs. Segariff in Acquisitions?
Yeah, I think, I don't know if she's still here.
No, then, was she here then when you got here?
No, I don't think she was here then, but I remember her, of course, yeah.
See, her husband was retired, he was deceased by then, but he had been in the history department many years.
Oh, I didn't know that.
And she would let us know as the budget was about to end up if there were some departments that hadn't spent all of their money and it was going to revert back.
And so we in the history department would turn in some extra orders.
Oh, I see.
How wonderful.
Well, good.
Glad you got a little bit of it.
And there were two or three of us that ate our sack lunches together and about once a week.
we would come over and she would allow us to go through in the acquisitions room the newly acquired material just to see what was coming in.
Just to see what was coming in.
And now I've been down in the first floor when I first got here looking at some of the new things and that is really something.
Now, let's shift away from the library a little to the community.
Describe moving into a new community and making friends and getting settled in.
Well, it was, of course, it was very, it was hard for my children.
One, of course, our oldest boy was in college.
But there are two younger boys.
One was in the ninth grade and one was in the eighth grade.
And they were, of course, coming from the Denver schools, which were very good.
This was where they were way behind.
They caught up, of course.
But they never had to work in high school.
They didn't have to start working hard until they got into college.
But then I don't, you know.
And of course, it was a whole new world for them.
It was just as much of a shock for them as it was for me.
Now for Bob it was a challenge because he, you know, we all realize he's a born teacher and I will say that without any qualms.
He'd been in industry that helped a lot in the petroleum geology business, but he really just loves teaching and there was no question about it.
And where did you all, who were some of the close friends you made quickly?
Well, back then, you know, it was pretty much on a departmental kind of basis.
But as I got to meet as many people as I did at the university, I got to meet from all departments.
But still, I think that for quite a while there, you probably remember.